

--- page 171 ---
Creating Depth

--- page 172 ---
Emulate a light source
Have you ever noticed how some elements in an interface feel like they’re
raised off of the page, while others feel like they are inset into the
background?
Creating this effect might look complicated at first, but it actually only
requires you to understand one fundamental rule.

--- page 173 ---
Light comes from above
Take a look at the panelling on this door:
Even though you’re just looking at a flat image, it’s still pretty obvious that
the panels on the door are raised. Why is that?
Notice how the top edge of the panel is lighter? That’s because it’s angled
towards the sky and receives more light. Similarly, the bottom edge is darker
because it’s angled away from the sky, receiving less light.
The only way those edges could possibly be oriented that way is if the panel
itself is raised, so that’s how our brains perceive it.
173 Emulate a light source

--- page 174 ---
Now take a look at the panelling on this cabinet:
In this case it’s clear that the panels are inset because there’s a shadow at
the top indicating that the lip above is blocking the light, and the bottom
edge is lighter, indicating that it’s angled upward.
To create this same sense of depth in your designs, all you need to do is
mimic the way light affects things in the real world.
Emulate a light source 174

--- page 175 ---
Simulating light in a user interface
If you want an element to appear raised or inset, first figure out what profile
you want that element to have, then mimic how a light source would interact
with that shape.
Raised elements
For example, say you had a button and you wanted it to feel raised off of the
page, with perfectly flat edges on the top and bottom:
Because the top and bottom edges are both flat, it would be impossible to
see both of them at the same time. People generally look slightly downward
towards their screens, so for the most natural look, reveal a little bit of the
top edge and hide the bottom edge.
Since the top edge is facing upward, make it slightly lighter than the face of
175 Emulate a light source

--- page 176 ---
the button, usually using a top border or an inset box shadow with a slight
vertical offset:
Choose the lighter color by hand instead of using a semi-transparent white
for best results — simply overlaying white can suck the saturation out of the
underlying color.
Next, you need to account for the fact that a raised element will block some
of the light from reaching the area below the element.
Do this by adding a small dark box shadow with a slight vertical offset (you
only want the shadow to appear below the element):
Don’t get carried away with the blur radius, a couple of pixels is plenty. These
Emulate a light source 176

--- page 177 ---
sorts of shadows should have pretty sharp edges — take a look at the
shadow cast by the bottom of a wall outlet or window frame for a real-world
example.
Inset elements
Say you’re designing a “well” component that should feel like it’s recessed
into the page.
Looking slightly downward, only the bottom lip would be visible. Since it’s
facing towards the sky, give that edge a slightly lighter color using a bottom
border or inset shadow with a negative vertical offset:
177 Emulate a light source

--- page 178 ---
The area above the well should block some of the light from reaching the
very top of the well, so add a small dark inset box shadow with a slight
positive vertical offset to make sure it doesn’t poke through at the bottom:
This same treatment works for any element that may need to appear inset,
for example text inputs and checkboxes:
Emulate a light source 178

--- page 179 ---
Don’t get carried away
Once you understand how to simulate light in an interface, it can be
tempting to tinker away for hours, tweaking and tweaking to see how closely
you can mimic the real world.
While this can be a fun exercise, in practice it can lead to interfaces that are
busy and unclear. Borrowing some visual cues from the real world is a great
way to add a bit of depth, but there’s no need to try and make things look
photo-realistic.
179 Emulate a light source

--- page 180 ---
Use shadows to convey elevation
Shadows can be more than just a flashy effect — used thoughtfully, they let
you position elements on a virtual z-axis to create a meaningful sense of
depth.
Small shadows with a tight blur radius make an element feel only slightly
raised off of the background, while larger shadows with a higher blur radius
make an element feel much closer to the user:
The closer something feels to the user, the more it will attract their focus.

--- page 181 ---
You might use a smaller shadow for something like a button, where you want
the user to notice it but don’t want it to dominate the page:
Medium shadows are useful for things like dropdowns; elements that need
to sit a bit further above the rest of the UI:
181 Use shadows to convey elevation

--- page 182 ---
Large shadows are great for modal dialogs, where you really want to capture
the user’s attention:
Establishing an elevation system
Just like with color, typography, spacing, and sizing, defining a fixed set of
shadows will speed up your workflow and help maintain consistency in your
designs.
You don’t need a ton of different shadows — five options is usually plenty.
Use shadows to convey elevation 182

--- page 183 ---
Start by defining your smallest shadow and your largest shadow, then fill in
the middle with shadows that increase in size pretty linearly:
Combining shadows with interaction
Shadows aren’t only useful for positioning elements on the z-axis statically;
they’re a great way to provide visual cues to the user as they interact with
elements, too.
For example, say you had a list of items where the user could click and drag
each item to sort them. Adding a shadow to an item when a user clicks it
makes it feel like it pops forward above the other items in the list, and makes
it clear to the user that they can drag it:
183 Use shadows to convey elevation

--- page 184 ---
Similarly, you can make a button feel like it’s being pressed into the page
when a user clicks it by switching to a smaller shadow, or perhaps removing
the shadow altogether:
Using shadows in a meaningful way like this is a great way to hack the
process of choosing what sort of shadow an element should have. Don’t
think about the shadow itself, think about where you want the element to sit
on the z-axis and assign it a shadow accordingly.
Use shadows to convey elevation 184

--- page 185 ---
185 Use shadows to convey elevation

--- page 186 ---
Shadows can have two parts
Ever inspected a really nice shadow on a site and noticed they were actually
using two shadows?
There’s a method to this madness, and it’s actually pretty simple and makes a
lot of sense.
When you see someone combining two shadows, they’re not just
experimenting randomly until things look nice, they’re using each shadow to
do a specific job.
The first shadow is larger and softer, with a considerable vertical offset and
large blur radius. It simulates the shadow cast behind an object by a direct
light source.

--- page 187 ---
The second shadow is tighter and darker, with less of a vertical offset and a
smaller blur radius. It simulates the shadowed area underneath an object
where even ambient light has a hard time reaching.
Using two shadows like this gives you a lot more control than you’d get with
a single shadow — you can keep the larger shadow nice and subtle while still
187 Shadows can have two parts

--- page 188 ---
making the shadow closer the element’s edges nice and defined.
Accounting for elevation
As an object gets further away from a surface, the small, dark shadow
created by a lack of ambient light slowly disappears (go ahead, try it out with
something on your desk).
Shadows can have two parts 188

--- page 189 ---
So if you’re going to use this two-shadow technique in your own projects,
make sure you make that shadow more subtle for shadows that represent a
higher elevation.
It should be quite distinct for your lowest elevation, and almost (or
completely) invisible at your highest elevation.
189 Shadows can have two parts

--- page 190 ---
Even flat designs can have depth
When most people talk about “flat design”, they mean designing without
shadows, gradients, or any other effects that try to mimic how light interacts
with things in the real-world.
But the most effective flat designs still convey depth, they just do it in a
different way.

--- page 191 ---
Creating depth with color
In general (especially with shades of the same color), lighter objects feel
closer to us and darker objects feel further away.
Make an element lighter than the background color to make it feel like it’s
raised off of the page, or darker than the background color if you want it to
feel inset like a well:
This is just as applicable to non-flat designs, too — color is just another tool
in your toolbelt for conveying distance.
191 Even flat designs can have depth

--- page 192 ---
Using solid shadows
Another way to communicate depth in a flat design is to use short, vertically
offset shadows with no blur radius at all.
It’s a great way to make a card or button stand off the page a little bit without
sacrificing that flat aesthetic.
Even flat designs can have depth 192

--- page 193 ---
193 Even flat designs can have depth

--- page 194 ---
Overlap elements to create layers
One of the most effective ways to create depth is to overlap different
elements to make it feel like a design has multiple layers.
For example, instead of containing a card entirely within another element,
offset it so it crosses the transition between two different backgrounds:


--- page 195 ---
You could also make an element taller than its parent, so it overlaps on both
sides:
Overlapping elements can add depth to smaller components too, for
example the controls on this carousel:
Overlapping images
This technique can work great with images as well, but without special
195 Overlap elements to create layers

--- page 196 ---
consideration it’s easy for overlapping images to clash.
A simple trick for avoiding this is to give the images an “invisible border” —
one that matches the background color — so there’s always a bit of a gap
between images:
You’ll still create the appearance of layers but with none of the ugly clashing.
Overlap elements to create layers 196

--- page 197 ---


--- page 198 ---
