

--- page 101 ---
Designing Text

--- page 102 ---
Establish a type scale
Most interfaces use way too many font sizes. Unless a team has a rigid
design system in place, it’s not uncommon to find that every pixel value from
10px to 24px has been used in the UI somewhere.
Choosing font sizes without a system is a bad idea for two reasons:
1. It leads to annoying inconsistencies in your designs.
2. It slows down your workflow.
So how do you define a type system?

--- page 103 ---
Choosing a scale
Just like with spacing and sizing, a linear scale won’t work. Smaller jumps
between font sizes are useful at the bottom of the scale, but you don’t want
to waste time deciding between 46px and 48px for a large headline.
Modular scales
One approach is to calculate your type scale using a ratio, like 4:5 (a “major
third”), 2:3 (a “perfect fifth”), or perhaps the “golden ratio”, 1:1.618. This is
often called a “modular scale”.
You start with a sensible base value (16px is common since it’s the default
font size for most browsers), apply your ratio to get the next value, then
apply your ratio to that value to get the next value, and so on and so forth:
103 Establish a type scale

--- page 104 ---
The mathematical purity of this approach is alluring, but in practice, it’s not
perfect for a couple of reasons.
1. You end up with fractional values.
Using a 16px base and 4:5 ratio, your scale will end up with lots of sizes
that don’t land right on the pixel, like 31.25px, 39.063px, 48.828px, etc.
Browsers all handle subpixel rounding a little bit differently, so it’s best to
avoid fractional sizes if you can avoid it.
If you do want to use this approach, make sure you round the values
yourself when defining the scale to avoid off-by-one pixel issues across
browsers.
2. You usually need more sizes.
This approach can work well if you’re defining a type scale for long form
content like an article, but for interface design, the jumps you get using
a modular scale are often a bit too limiting.
With a (rounded) 3:4 type scale, you get sizes like 12px, 16px, 21px, and
28px. While this might not seem too limiting on the surface, in practice
you’re going to wish you had a size between 12px and 16px, and another
between 16px and 21px.
You could use a tighter ratio like 8:9, but at this point you’re just trying to
pick a scale that happens to match the sizes you already know you want.
Hand-crafted scales
For interface design, a more practical approach is to simply pick values by
hand. You don’t have to worry about subpixel rounding errors this way, and
you have total control over which sizes exist instead of outsourcing that job
to some mathematical formula.
Establish a type scale 104

--- page 105 ---
Here’s an example of a scale that works well for most projects and aligns
nicely with the spacing and sizing scale recommended in “Establishing a
spacing and sizing system”:
It’s constrained just enough to speed up your decision making, but isn’t so
limited as to make you feel like you’re missing a useful size.
105 Establish a type scale

--- page 106 ---
Avoid em units
When you’re building a type scale, don’t use em units to define your sizes.
Because em units are relative to the current font size, the computed font size
of nested elements is often not actually a value in your scale.
For example, say you’ve defined an em-based type scale like this:
Establish a type scale 106

--- page 107 ---
If you give an element a font size of 1.25em (20px by default), inside of that
element 1em is now equal to 20px. That means that if you give one of the
nested elements a font size of .875em, the actual computed font size is
17.5px, not a value from your type scale!
Stick to px or rem units — it’s the only way to guarantee you’re actually
sticking to the system.
107 Establish a type scale

--- page 108 ---
Use good fonts
With thousands of different typefaces out there to choose from, separating
the good from the bad can be an intimidating task.
Developing an eye for all of the details that make a good typeface can take
years. You probably don’t have years, so here are a few tricks you can use to
start picking out high quality typefaces right away.
Play it safe
For UI design, your safest bet is a fairly neutral sans-serif — think something
like Helvetica.
If you really don’t trust your own taste, one great option is to rely on the
system font stack:
-apple-system, Segoe UI, Roboto, Noto Sans, Ubuntu, Cantarell, Helvetica Neue;

--- page 109 ---
It might not be the most ambitious choice, but at least your users will
already be used to seeing it.
Ignore typefaces with less than five weights
This isn’t always true, but as a general rule, typefaces that come in a lot of
different weights tend to be crafted with more care and attention to detail
than typefaces with fewer weights.
Many font directories (like Google Fonts) will let you filter by “number of
styles”, which is a combination of the available weights as well as the italic
variations of those weights.
A great way to limit the number of options you have to choose from is to
crank that up to 10+ (to account for italics):
109 Use good fonts

--- page 110 ---
On Google Fonts specifically, that cuts out 85% of the available options,
leaving you with less than 50 sans-serifs to choose from.
Optimize for legibility
When someone designs a font family, they are usually designing it for a
specific purpose. Fonts meant for headlines usually have tighter letter-
spacing and shorter lowercase letters (a shorter x-height), while fonts meant
for smaller sizes have wider letter-spacing and taller lowercase letters.
Keep this in mind and avoid using condensed typefaces with short x-heights
for your main UI text.
Trust the wisdom of the crowd
If a font is popular, it’s probably a good font. Most font directories will let you
sort by popularity, so this can be a great way to limit your choices.
This is especially useful when you’re trying to pick out something other than
a neutral UI typeface. Picking a nice serif with some personality for example
can be tough.
Use good fonts 110

--- page 111 ---
Leveraging the collective decision-making power of thousands of other
people can make it a lot easier.
Steal from people who care
Inspect some of your favorite sites and see what typefaces they are using.
111 Use good fonts

--- page 112 ---
There are a lot of great design teams out there full of people with really
strong opinions about typography, and they’ll often choose great fonts that
you might have never found using some of the safer approaches outlined
above.
Developing your intuition
Once you start paying closer attention to the typography on well-designed
sites, it’s not long before you feel pretty comfortable labeling a typeface as
awesome or terrible.
You’re gonna be a type snob soon enough, but the advice outlined above will
help get you by in the meantime.
Use good fonts 112

--- page 113 ---
113 Use good fonts

--- page 114 ---
Keep your line length in check
When styling paragraphs, it’s easy to make the mistake of fitting the text to
your layout instead of trying to create the best reading experience.
Usually this means lines that are too long, making text harder to read.
For the best reading experience, make your paragraphs wide enough to fit
between 45 and 75 characters per line. The easiest way to do this on the
web is using em units, which are relative to the current font size. A width of
20-35em will get you in the right ballpark.


--- page 115 ---
Going a bit wider than 75 characters per line can sometimes work too, but
be aware that you’re entering risky territory — stick to the 45-75 range if you
want to play it safe.
Dealing with wider content
If you’re mixing paragraph text with images or other large components, you
should still limit the paragraph width even if the overall content area needs
to be wider to accommodate the other elements.
115 Keep your line length in check

--- page 116 ---
It might seem counterintuitive at first to use different widths in the same
content area, but the result almost always looks more polished.
Keep your line length in check 116

--- page 117 ---
117 Keep your line length in check

--- page 118 ---
Baseline, not center
There are a lot of situations where it makes sense to use multiple font sizes
to create hierarchy on a single line.
For example, maybe you’re designing a card that has a large title in the top
left and a smaller list of actions in the top right.
When you’re mixing font sizes like this, your instinct might be to vertically
center the text for balance:


--- page 119 ---
When there’s a decent amount of space between the different font sizes it
often won’t look bad enough to catch your attention, but when the text is
close together the awkward alignment becomes more obvious:
A better approach is to align mixed font sizes by their baseline, which is the
imaginary line that letters rest on:
119 Baseline, not center

--- page 120 ---
When you align mixed font sizes by their baseline, you’re taking advantage of
an alignment reference that your eyes already perceive.
The result is a simpler, cleaner look than what you get when you center two
pieces of text and offset their baselines.
Baseline, not center 120

--- page 121 ---
121 Baseline, not center

--- page 122 ---
Line-height is proportional
You might have heard the advice that a line-height of about 1.5 is a good
starting point from a readability perspective.
While that’s not necessarily untrue, choosing the right line-height for your
text is a bit more complicated than just using the same value across the
board in all situations.
Accounting for line length
The reason we add space between lines of text is to make it easy for the
reader to find the next line when the text wraps. Have you ever accidentally
read the same line of text twice, or accidentally skipped a line? The line-
height was probably too short.

--- page 123 ---
When lines of text are spaced too tightly, it’s easy to finish reading a line of
text at the right edge of a page then jump your eyes all the way back to the
left edge only to be unsure which line is next.
This problem is magnified when lines of text are long. The further your eyes
have to jump horizontally to read the next line, the easier it is to lose your
place.
That means that your line-height and paragraph width should be
proportional — narrow content can use a shorter line-height like 1.5, but wide
content might need a line-height as tall as 2.
123 Line-height is proportional

--- page 124 ---
Accounting for font size
Line length isn’t the only factor in choosing the right line-height — font size
has a big impact as well.
When text is small, extra line spacing is important because it makes it a lot
easier for your eyes to find the next line when the text wraps.
But as text gets larger, your eyes don’t need as much help. This means that
for large headline text you might not need any extra line spacing, and a line-
height of 1 is perfectly fine.
Line-height is proportional 124

--- page 125 ---
Line-height and font size are inversely proportional — use a taller line-height
for small text and a shorter line-height for large text.
125 Line-height is proportional

--- page 126 ---
Not every link needs a color
When you’re including a link in a block of otherwise non-link text, it’s
important to make sure that the link stands out and looks clickable.
But when you’re designing an interface where almost everything is a link,
using a treatment designed to make links “pop” in paragraph text can be
really overbearing.


--- page 127 ---
Instead, emphasize most links in a more subtle way, like by just using a
heavier font weight or darker color.
Some links might not even need to be emphasized by default at all. If you’ve
got links in your interface that are really ancillary and not part of the main
path a user takes through the application, consider adding an underline or
changing the color only on hover.
They’ll still be discoverable to any users who think to try, but won’t compete
for attention with more important actions on the page.
127 Not every link needs a color

--- page 128 ---
Align with readability in mind
In general, text should be aligned to match the direction of the language it’s
written in. For English (and most other languages), that means that the vast
majority of text should be left-aligned.
Other alignment options do have their place though, you just need to use
them effectively.
Don’t center long form text
Center-alignment can look great for headlines or short, independent blocks
of text.


--- page 129 ---
But if something is longer than two or three lines, it will almost always look
better left-aligned.
If you’ve got a few blocks of text you want to center but one of them is a bit
too long, the easiest fix is to rewrite the content and make it shorter:
Not only will it fix the alignment issue, it will make your design feel more
consistent, too.
129 Align with readability in mind

--- page 130 ---
Right-align numbers
If you’re designing a table that includes numbers, right-align them.
When the decimal in a list of numbers is always in the same place, they’re a
lot easier to compare at a glance.
Hyphenate justified text
Justified text looks great in print and can work well on the web when you’re
going for a more formal look, but without special care, it can create a lot of
awkward gaps between words:
Align with readability in mind 130

--- page 131 ---
To avoid this, whenever you justify text, you should also enable hyphenation:
Justified text works best in situations where you’re trying to mimic a print
look, perhaps for an online magazine or newspaper. Even then, left aligned
text works great too, so it’s really just a matter of preference.
131 Align with readability in mind

--- page 132 ---
Use letter-spacing effectively
When styling text, a lot of effort is put into getting the weight, color, and line-
height just right, but it’s easy to forget that letter-spacing can be tweaked,
too.
As a general rule, you should trust the typeface designer and leave letter-
spacing alone. That said, there are a couple of common situations where
adjusting it can improve your designs.

--- page 133 ---
Tightening headlines
When someone designs a font family, they design it with a purpose in mind.
A family like Open Sans is designed to be highly legible even at small sizes,
so the built-in letter-spacing is a lot wider than a family like Oswald which is
designed for headlines.
If you want to use a family with wider letter-spacing for headlines or titles, it
can often make sense to decrease the letter-spacing to mimic the
condensed look of a purpose-built headline family:
Avoid trying to make this work the other way around though — headline
fonts rarely work well at small sizes even if you increase the letter spacing.
133 Use letter-spacing effectively

--- page 134 ---
Improving all-caps legibility
The letter-spacing in most font families is optimized for normal “sentence
case” text — a capital letter followed by mostly lowercase letters.
Lowercase letters have a lot of variety visually. Letters like n, v, and e fit
entirely within a typeface’s x-height, other letters like y, g, and p have
descenders that poke out below the baseline, and letters like b, f, and t have
ascenders that extend above.
All-caps text on the other hand isn’t so diverse. Since every letter is the same
height, using the default letter-spacing often leads to text that is harder to
read because there are fewer distinguishing characteristics between letters.
For that reason, it often makes sense to increase the letter-spacing of all-
caps text to improve readability:
Use letter-spacing effectively 134

--- page 135 ---


--- page 136 ---
