

--- page 219 ---
Finishing Touches

--- page 220 ---
Supercharge the defaults
You don’t always have to add new elements to a design to add flare — there
are a lot of ways to liven up a page by “supercharging” what’s already there.
For example, if your design includes a bulleted list, try replacing the bullets
with icons:
Checkmarks and arrows are great generic choices for a lot of situations, but
you can also use something more specific to your content, like a padlock
icon for a list of security-related features:


--- page 221 ---
Similarly, if you’re working on a testimonial try “promoting” the quotes into
visual elements by increasing the size and changing the color:
Links are another great candidate for special styling. You can do something
as simple as changing the color and font weight, or something as fancy as a
thick and colorful custom underline that partially overlaps the text:
221 Supercharge the defaults

--- page 222 ---
If you’re working on a form, using custom checkboxes and radio buttons is
an easy way to add some color to the design:
Just using one of your brand colors for the selected states instead of the
browser defaults is often enough to take something from feeling boring to
feeling polished and well-designed.
Supercharge the defaults 222

--- page 223 ---
223 Supercharge the defaults

--- page 224 ---
Add color with accent borders
If you’re not a graphic designer, how do you add that dash of visual flair to
your UI that other designs get from beautiful photography or colorful
illustrations?
One simple trick that can make a big difference is to add colorful accent
borders to parts of your interface that would otherwise feel a bit bland.
For example, across the top of a card:


--- page 225 ---
…or to highlight active navigation items:
…or along the side of an alert message:
…or as a short accent underneath a headline:
225 Add color with accent borders

--- page 226 ---
…or even across the top of your entire layout:
It doesn’t take any graphic design talent to add a colored rectangle to your
UI, and it can go a long way towards making something feel more
“designed.”
Add color with accent borders 226

--- page 227 ---
227 Add color with accent borders

--- page 228 ---
Decorate your backgrounds
Even if you do a great job with hierarchy, spacing, and typography,
sometimes a design will still feel a little bit plain.
A great way to break up some of the monotony without drastically altering
the design is to add some excitement to a few of your backgrounds.
Change the background color
One way to add some excitement to a background is to simply change the
color.


--- page 229 ---
This works great for emphasizing an individual panel, as well as for adding
some distinction between entire page sections.
For a more energetic look, you could even use a slight gradient:
For best results, use two hues that are no more than about 30° apart.
229 Decorate your backgrounds

--- page 230 ---
Use a repeating pattern
Another approach is to add a subtle repeatable pattern, like this one from
Hero Patterns:
You don’t have to necessarily repeat it across the entire background, either
— a pattern designed to repeat along a single edge can look great, too.
Keep the contrast between the background and the pattern pretty low to
ensure readability.
Decorate your backgrounds 230

--- page 231 ---
Add a simple shape or illustration
Instead of decorating an entire background, you can also try including an
individual graphic or two in specific positions.
Simple geometric shapes work well for this:
…as do small chunks of a repeatable pattern:
231 Decorate your backgrounds

--- page 232 ---
You can even do something more complex, like a simplified world map:
Just like with a full background pattern, it’s best to keep the contrast low so
nothing interferes with the content.
Decorate your backgrounds 232

--- page 233 ---
233 Decorate your backgrounds

--- page 234 ---
Don’t overlook empty states
Imagine you’re designing a new feature for an app you’re working on.
You’ve spent a ton of time crafting the perfect realistic sample data, picking
out usernames and avatars, and putting together a beautiful and electrifying
screen.


--- page 235 ---
You code it all up and deploy it to production. But when an excited user
clicks the new item in the nav, they see this:
If you’re designing something that depends on user-generated content, the
empty state should be a priority, not an afterthought.
Try incorporating an image or illustration to grab the user’s attention, and
emphasizing the call-to-action to encourage them to take the next step:
235 Don’t overlook empty states

--- page 236 ---
If you’re working on something that has a bunch of supporting UI like tabs or
filters, consider hiding that stuff entirely. There’s no point in presenting a
bunch of actions that don’t do anything until the user has created some
content.
Empty states are a user’s first interaction with a new product or feature. Use
them as an opportunity to be interesting and exciting — don’t settle for plain
and boring.
Don’t overlook empty states 236

--- page 237 ---
237 Don’t overlook empty states

--- page 238 ---
Use fewer borders
When you need to create separation between two elements, try to resist
immediately reaching for a border.
While borders are a great way to distinguish two elements from one another,
they aren’t the only way, and using too many of them can make your design
feel busy and cluttered.

--- page 239 ---
Use a box shadow
Box shadows do a great job of outlining an element like a border would, but
can be more subtle and accomplish the same goal without being as
distracting.
This approach works best when the element you are applying the box
shadow to is not the same color as the background.
239 Use fewer borders

--- page 240 ---
Use two different background colors
Giving adjacent elements slightly different background colors is usually all
you need to create distinction between them.
If you’re already using different background colors in addition to a border, try
removing the border; you might not need it.
Use fewer borders 240

--- page 241 ---
Add extra spacing
What better way to create separation between elements than to simply
increase the separation?
Spacing things further apart is a great way to create distinction between
groups of elements without introducing any new UI at all.
241 Use fewer borders

--- page 242 ---
Think outside the box
Most people have a lot of preconceived notions about how certain
components are supposed to look. But just because we’ve been conditioned
to believe that there’s only one way to design a particular component,
doesn’t mean it’s true.
For example, picture a dropdown menu. You’re probably picturing a white
box with a bit of a drop shadow and a list of links stacked inside of it:


--- page 243 ---
But who says a dropdown needs to be a boring list of links? It’s just a floating
box on the screen, you can do anything you want with it.
Break it into sections, use multiple columns, add supporting text or colorful
icons — do something fun with it!
And don’t just stop at dropdowns; what about something like a table?
243 Think outside the box

--- page 244 ---
When you imagine a table, you probably think of columns that each contain
one specific piece of data:
Tables don’t have to work this way, though — if a column doesn’t need to be
sortable, there’s no reason you can’t combine it with a related column and
introduce some interesting hierarchy:
Think outside the box 244

--- page 245 ---
Table content doesn’t have to be plain text, either. Add images if it makes
sense, or introduce some color to enrich the existing data:
How about radio buttons? There’s nothing more boring than a stack of labels
with little circles next to them.
245 Think outside the box

--- page 246 ---
If a set of radio buttons are an important part of the UI you’re designing, try
something like selectable cards instead:
Don’t let your existing beliefs hold back your designs — constraints are
powerful but sometimes a bit of freedom is just what you need to take an
interface to the next level.
Think outside the box 246

--- page 247 ---


--- page 248 ---
