

--- page 35 ---
Hierarchy is Everything

--- page 36 ---
Not all elements are equal
When you think of visual design as “styling things so they look good”, it’s
easy to see why it might feel hard to achieve without innate artistic talent.
But it turns out that one of the biggest factors in making something “look
good” has nothing to do with superficial styling at all.
Visual hierarchy refers to how important the elements in an interface appear
in relation to one another, and it’s the most effective tool you have for
making something feel “designed”.
When everything in an interface is competing for attention, it feels noisy and
chaotic, like one big wall of content where it’s not clear what actually
matters:


--- page 37 ---
When you deliberately de-emphasize secondary and tertiary information,
and make an effort to highlight the elements that are most important, the
result is immediately more pleasing, even though the color scheme, font
choice, and layout haven’t changed:
So how do you actually make this happen? In the following chapters, we’ll
cover a number of specific strategies you can use to introduce hierarchy into
your designs.
37 Not all elements are equal

--- page 38 ---
Size isn’t everything
Relying too much on font size to control your hierarchy is a mistake — it
often leads to primary content that’s too large, and secondary content that’s
too small.
Instead of leaving all of the heavy lifting to font size alone, try using font
weight or color to do the same job.
For example, making a primary element bolder lets you use a more

--- page 39 ---
reasonable font size, and often does a better job at communicating its
importance anyways:
Similarly, using a softer color for supporting text instead of a tiny font size
makes it clear that the text is secondary while sacrificing less on readability:
39 Size isn’t everything

--- page 40 ---
Try and stick to two or three colors:
• A dark color for primary content (like the headline of an article)
• A grey for secondary content (like the date an article was published)
• A lighter grey for tertiary content (maybe the copyright notice in a
footer)
Similarly, two font weights are usually enough for UI work:
• A normal font weight (400 or 500 depending on the font) for most text
• A heavier font weight (600 or 700) for text you want to emphasize
Stay away from font weights under 400 for UI work — they can work for
large headings but are too hard to read at smaller sizes. If you’re considering
Size isn’t everything 40

--- page 41 ---
using a lighter weight to de-emphasize some text, use a lighter color or
smaller font size instead.
41 Size isn’t everything

--- page 42 ---
Don’t use grey text on colored
backgrounds
Making text a lighter grey is a great way to de-emphasize it on white
backgrounds, but it doesn’t look so great on colored backgrounds.
That’s because the effect we’re actually seeing with grey on white is reduced
contrast.

--- page 43 ---
Making the text closer to the background color is what actually helps create
hierarchy, not making it light grey.
You might think that the easiest way to achieve this is to use white text and
reduce the opacity:
While this does reduce the contrast, it often results in text that looks dull,
washed out, and sometimes even disabled.
43 Don’t use grey text on colored backgrounds

--- page 44 ---
Even worse, using this approach on top of an image or pattern means the
background will show through the text:
A better approach is to hand-pick a new color, based on the background
color.
Choose a color with the same hue, and adjust the saturation and lightness
until it looks right to you:
Hand-picking a color this way makes it easy to reduce the contrast without
the text looking faded.
Don’t use grey text on colored backgrounds 44

--- page 45 ---
45 Don’t use grey text on colored backgrounds

--- page 46 ---
Emphasize by de-emphasizing
Sometimes you’ll run into a situation where the main element of an interface
isn’t standing out enough, but there’s nothing you can add to it to give it the
emphasis it needs.
For example, despite trying to make this active nav item “pop” by giving it a
different color, it still doesn’t really stand out compared to the inactive items:
When you run into situations like this, instead of trying to further emphasize
the element you want to draw attention to, figure out how you can de-
emphasize the elements that are competing with it.
In this example, you could do that by giving the inactive items a softer color
so they sit more in the background:
You can apply this thinking to bigger pieces of an interface as well. For

--- page 47 ---
example, if a sidebar feels like it’s competing with your main content area,
don’t give it a background color — let the content sit directly on the page
background instead:
47 Emphasize by de-emphasizing

--- page 48 ---
Labels are a last resort
Put down the accessibility pitchfork — this isn’t about forms.
When presenting data to the user (especially data from the database), it’s
easy to fall into the trap of displaying it using a naive label: value format.
The problem with this approach is that it makes it difficult to present the
data with any sort of hierarchy; every piece of data is given equal emphasis.
You might not need a label at all
In a lot of situations, you can tell what a piece of data is just by looking at the
format.
For example, janedoe@example.com is an email address, (555) 765-4321 is a
phone number and $19.99 is a price.
When the format isn’t enough, the context often is. When you see the phrase
“Customer Support” listed below someone’s name in an employee directory,

--- page 49 ---
you don’t need a label to make the connection that that is the department
the person works in.
When you’re able to present data without labels, it’s much easier to
emphasize important or identifying information, making the interface easier
to use while at the same time making it feel more “designed”.
Combine labels and values
Even when a piece of data isn’t completely clear without a label, you can
often avoid adding a label by adding clarifying text to the value.
For example, if you need to display inventory in an e-commerce interface,
instead of “In stock: 12”, try something like “12 left in stock”.
49 Labels are a last resort

--- page 50 ---
If you’re building a real estate app, something like “Bedrooms: 3” could
simply become “3 bedrooms”.
When you’re able to combine labels and values into a single unit, it’s much
easier to give each piece of data meaningful styling without sacrificing on
clarity.
Labels are secondary
Sometimes you really do need a label; for example when you’re displaying
multiple pieces of similar data and they need to be easily scannable, like on
a dashboard.
Labels are a last resort 50

--- page 51 ---
In these situations, add the label, but treat it as supporting content. The data
itself is what matters, the label is just there for clarity.
De-emphasize the label by making it smaller, reducing the contrast, using a
lighter font weight, or some combination of all three.
When to emphasize a label
If you’re designing an interface where you know the user will be looking for
the label, it might make sense to the emphasize the label instead of the data.
This is often the case on information-dense pages, like the technical
specifications of a product.
If a user is trying to find out the dimensions of a smartphone, they’re
probably scanning the page for words like “depth”, not “7.6mm”.
51 Labels are a last resort

--- page 52 ---
Don’t de-emphasize the data too much in these scenarios; it’s still important
information. Simply using a darker color for the label and a slightly lighter
color for the value is often enough.
Labels are a last resort 52

--- page 53 ---
53 Labels are a last resort

--- page 54 ---
Separate visual hierarchy from
document hierarchy
It’s important to use semantic markup when building for the web, which
means you’ll often be using heading tags like h1, h2, or h3 if you decide to add
a title to part of an interface.
By default, web browsers assign progressively smaller font sizes to heading
elements, so an h1 is pretty large, and an h6 is pretty small. This can be
helpful for document-style content like articles or documentation, but it can
encourage some bad decisions in application UIs.
Using an h1 tag to add a title like Manage Account to a page makes perfect
sense semantically, but because we’re trained to believe that h1 elements
should be big, it’s easy to fall into the trap of making those titles bigger than
they really need to be.


--- page 55 ---
A lot of the time, section titles act more like labels than headings — they are
supportive content, they shouldn’t be stealing all the attention.
Usually the content in that section should be the focus, not the title. That
means that a lot of the time, titles should actually be pretty small:
Taken to the extreme, you might even include section titles in your markup
for accessibility reasons but completely hide them visually because the
content speaks for itself.
Don’t let the element you’re using influence how you choose to style it —
pick elements for semantic purposes and style them however you need to
create the best visual hierarchy.
55 Separate visual hierarchy from document hierarchy

--- page 56 ---
Balance weight and contrast
The reason bold text feels emphasized compared to regular text is that bold
text covers more surface area — in the same amount of space, more pixels
are used for text than for the background.
So why is this interesting? Well it turns out that the relationship between
surface area and hierarchy has implications on other elements in a UI as well.
Using contrast to compensate for weight
One of the places understanding this relationship becomes important is
when working with icons.
Just like bold text, icons (especially solid ones) are generally pretty “heavy”
and cover a lot of surface area. As a result, when you put an icon next to
some text, the icon tends to feel emphasized.

--- page 57 ---
Unlike text, there’s no way to change the “weight” of an icon, so to create
balance it needs to be de-emphasized in some other way.
A simple and effective way to do this is to lower the contrast of the icon by
giving it a softer color.
57 Balance weight and contrast

--- page 58 ---
This works anywhere you need to balance elements that have different
weights. Reducing the contrast works like a counterbalance, making heavier
elements feel lighter even though the weight hasn’t changed.
Using weight to compensate for contrast
Just like how reducing contrast helps to de-emphasize heavy elements,
increasing weight is a great way to add a bit of emphasis to low contrast
elements.
This is useful when things like thin 1px borders are too subtle using a soft
color, but darkening the color makes the design feel harsh and noisy.
Balance weight and contrast 58

--- page 59 ---
Making the border a bit heavier by increasing the width helps to emphasize
it without losing the softer look:
59 Balance weight and contrast

--- page 60 ---
Semantics are secondary
When there are multiple actions a user can take on a page, it’s easy to fall
into the trap of designing those actions based purely on semantics.
Semantics are an important part of button design, but that doesn’t mean you
can forget about hierarchy.
Every action on a page sits somewhere in a pyramid of importance. Most
pages only have one true primary action, a couple of less important
secondary actions, and a few seldom used tertiary actions.
When designing these actions, it’s important to communicate their place in
the hierarchy.
• Primary actions should be obvious. Solid, high contrast background
colors work great here.

--- page 61 ---
• Secondary actions should be clear but not prominent. Outline styles or
lower contrast background colors are great options.
• Tertiary actions should be discoverable but unobtrusive. Styling these
actions like links is usually the best approach.
When you take a hierarchy-first approach to designing the actions on page,
the result is a much less busy UI that communicates more clearly:
61 Semantics are secondary

--- page 62 ---
Destructive actions
Being destructive or high severity doesn’t automatically mean a button
should be big, red, and bold.
If a destructive action isn’t the primary action on the page, it might be better
to give it a secondary or tertiary button treatment.
Combine this with a confirmation step where the destructive action actually
is the primary action, and apply the big, red, bold styling there.
Semantics are secondary 62

--- page 63 ---


--- page 64 ---
