

--- page 137 ---
Working with Color

--- page 138 ---
Ditch hex for HSL
Hex and RGB are the most common formats for representing color on the
web, but they’re not the most useful.
Using hex or RGB, colors that have a lot in common visually look nothing
alike in code.
HSL fixes this by representing colors using attributes the human-eye
intuitively perceives: hue, saturation, and lightness.
Hue is a color’s position on the color wheel — it’s the attribute of a color that
lets us identify two colors as “blue” even if they aren’t identical.


--- page 139 ---
Hue is measured in degrees, where 0° is red, 120° is green, and 240° is blue.
Saturation is how colorful or vivid a color looks. 0% saturation is grey (no
color), and 100% saturation is vibrant and intense.
Without saturation, hue is irrelevant — rotating the hue when saturation is
0% doesn’t actually change the color at all.
139 Ditch hex for HSL

--- page 140 ---
Lightness is just what it sounds like — it measures how close a color is to
black or to white. 0% lightness is pure black, 100% lightness is pure white,
and 50% lightness is a pure color at the given hue.
HSL vs. HSB
Don’t confuse HSL for HSB — lightness in HSL is not the same than
brightness in HSB.
In HSB, 0% brightness is always black, but 100% brightness is only white
when the saturation is 0%. When saturation is 100%, 100% brightness in HSB
is the same as 100% saturation and 50% lightness in HSL.
Ditch hex for HSL 140

--- page 141 ---
HSB is more common than HSL in design software, but browsers only
understand HSL, so if you’re designing for the web, HSL should be your
weapon of choice.
141 Ditch hex for HSL

--- page 142 ---
You need more colors than you
think
Ever used one of those color palette generators where you pick a starting
color, tweak some options, and are then bestowed the five perfect colors
you should use to build your website?
This calculated approach to picking the perfect color scheme is extremely
seductive, but it’s not very useful unless you want your site to look like this:


--- page 143 ---
What you actually need
You can’t build anything with five hex codes. To build something real, you
need a much more comprehensive set of colors to choose from.
You can break a good color palette down into three categories.
Greys
Text, backgrounds, panels, form controls — almost everything in an interface
is grey.
143 You need more colors than you think

--- page 144 ---
You’ll need more greys than you think, too — three or four shades might
sound like plenty but it won’t be long before you wish you had something a
little darker than shade #2 but a little lighter than shade #3.
In practice, you want 8-10 shades to choose from (more on this in “Define
your shades up front”). Not so many that you waste time deciding between
shade #77 and shade #78, but enough to make sure you don’t have to
compromise too much.
True black tends to look pretty unnatural, so start with a really dark grey and
work your way up to white in steady increments.
You need more colors than you think 144

--- page 145 ---
Primary color(s)
Most sites need one, maybe two colors that are used for primary actions,
active navigation elements, etc. These are the colors that determine the
overall look of a site — the ones that make you think of Facebook as “blue”.
Just like with greys, you need a variety (5-10) of lighter and darker shades to
choose from.
Ultra-light shades can be useful as a tinted background for things like alerts,
while darker shades work great for text.
Accent colors
On top of primary colors, every site needs a few accent colors for
communicating different things to the user.
For example, you might want to use an eye-grabbing color like yellow, pink,
or teal to highlight a new feature:
145 You need more colors than you think

--- page 146 ---
You might also need colors to emphasize different semantic states, like red
for confirming a destructive action:
…yellow for a warning message:
…or green to highlight a positive trend:
You need more colors than you think 146

--- page 147 ---
You’ll want multiple shades for these colors too, even though they should be
used pretty sparingly throughout the UI.
If you’re building something where you need to use color to distinguish or
categorize similar elements (like lines on graphs, events in a calendar, or
tags on a project), you might need even more accent colors.
All in, it’s not uncommon to need as many as ten different colors with 5-10
shades each for a complex UI.
147 You need more colors than you think

--- page 148 ---
Define your shades up front
When you need to create a lighter or darker variation of a color in your
palette, don’t get clever using CSS preprocessor functions like “lighten” or
“darken” to create shades on the fly. That’s how you end up with 35 slightly
different blues that all look the same.
Instead, define a fixed set of shades up front that you can choose from as
you work.
So how do you put together a palette like this anyways?
Choose the base color first
Start by picking a base color for the scale you want to create — the color in
the middle that your lighter and darker shades are based on.

--- page 149 ---
There’s no real scientific way to do this, but for primary and accent colors, a
good rule of thumb is to pick a shade that would work well as a button
background.
It’s important to note that there are no real rules here like “start at 50%
lightness” or anything — every color behaves a bit differently, so you’ll have
to rely on your eyes for this one.
Finding the edges
Next, pick your darkest shade and your lightest shade. There’s no real
science to this either, but it helps to think about where they will be used and
choose them using that context.
The darkest shade of a color is usually reserved for text, while the lightest
shade might be used to tint the background of an element.
A simple alert component is a good example that combines both of these
use cases, so it can be a great place to pick these colors.
149 Define your shades up front

--- page 150 ---
Start with a color that matches the hue of your base color, and adjust the
saturation and lightness until you’re satisfied.
Filling in the gaps
Once you’ve got your base, darkest, and lightest shades, you just need to fill
in the gaps in between them.
For most projects, you’ll need at least 5 shades per color, and probably
closer to 10 if you don’t want to feel too constrained.
Nine is a great number because it’s easy to divide and makes filling in the
gaps a little more straightforward. Let’s call our darkest shade 900, our base
shade 500, and our lightest shade 100.
Start by picking shades 700 and 300, the ones right in the middle of the
gaps. You want these shades to feel like the perfect compromise between
the shades on either side.
This creates four more holes in the scale (800, 600, 400, and 200), which
you can fill using the same approach.
Define your shades up front 150

--- page 151 ---
You should end up with a pretty balanced set of colors that provide just
enough options to accommodate your design ideas without feeling limiting.
What about greys?
With greys the base color isn’t as important, but otherwise the process is the
same. Start at the edges and fill in the gaps until you have what you need.
Pick your darkest grey by choosing a color for the darkest text in your
project, and your lightest grey by choosing something that works well for a
subtle off-white background.
It’s not a science
As tempting as it is, you can’t rely purely on math to craft the perfect color
palette.
A systematic approach like the one described above is great to get you
started, but don’t be afraid to make little tweaks if you need to.
Once you actually start using your colors in your designs, it’s almost
inevitable that you’ll want to tweak the saturation on a shade, or make a
couple of shades lighter or darker. Trust your eyes, not the numbers.
Just try to avoid adding new shades too often if you can avoid it. If you’re not
diligent about limiting your palette, you might as well have no color system
at all.
151 Define your shades up front

--- page 152 ---
Don’t let lightness kill your
saturation
In the HSL color space, as a color gets closer to 0% or 100% lightness, the
impact of saturation is weakened — the same saturation value at 50%
lightness looks more colorful than it does at 90% lightness.
That means that if you don’t want the lighter and darker shades of a given
color to look washed out, you need to increase the saturation as the
lightness gets further away from 50%.


--- page 153 ---
It’s subtle but little details like this add up, especially when a color is being
applied to a large section of a UI.
But what if your base color is already heavily saturated? How do you increase
the saturation if it’s already at 100%?
Use perceived brightness to your advantage
Which of these two colors do you think is lighter?
The yellow, right? Well it turns out both colors actually have the exact same
“lightness” in terms of HSL:
So why do we see the yellow as lighter? Well it turns out that every hue has
an inherent perceived brightness due to how the human eye perceives color.
You can calculate the perceived brightness of a color by plugging its RGB
components into this formula:
153 Don’t let lightness kill your saturation

--- page 154 ---
Taking samples of different hues with 100% saturation and 50% lightness, we
can get a good sense of the perceived brightness of different colors around
the color wheel:
As expected, yellow has a higher perceived brightness than blue. But what’s
interesting here is that perceived brightness doesn’t simply change linearly
from the darkest hue to the lightest hue — instead, there are three separate
local minimums (red, green, and blue) and three local maximums (yellow,
cyan, and magenta).
Changing brightness by rotating hue
On the surface, this is certainly an interesting thing to understand about
color. But things get really interesting when you realize how you can use this
knowledge in your designs.
Don’t let lightness kill your saturation 154

--- page 155 ---
Normally when you want to change how light a color looks, you adjust the
lightness component:
While this does work to lighten or darken a color, you often lose some of the
color’s intensity — the color also looks closer to white or to black, not just
lighter or darker.
Since different hues have a different perceived brightness, another way you
can change the brightness of a color is by rotating its hue.
To make a color lighter, rotate the hue towards the nearest bright hue — 60°,
180°, or 300°.
155 Don’t let lightness kill your saturation

--- page 156 ---
To make a color darker, rotate the hue towards the nearest dark hue — 0°,
120°, or 240°.
This can be really useful when trying to create a palette for a light color like
yellow. By gradually rotating the hue towards more of an orange as you
decrease the lightness, the darker shades will feel warm and rich instead of
dull and brown:
You can of course combine these approaches too, getting some of the
brightness by adjusting the hue and some from adjusting the lightness.
Don’t let lightness kill your saturation 156

--- page 157 ---
While this is a great way to change a color’s brightness without affecting its
intensity, it works best in small doses. Don’t rotate the hue more than 20-30°
or it will look like a totally different color instead of just lighter or darker.
157 Don’t let lightness kill your saturation

--- page 158 ---
Greys don’t have to be grey
By definition, true grey has a saturation of 0% — it doesn’t have any actual
color in it at all.
But in practice, a lot of the colors that we think of as grey are actually
saturated quite heavily:
This saturation is what makes some greys feel cool and other greys feel
warm.

--- page 159 ---
Color temperature
If you’ve ever purchased light bulbs before, you’ve had to make the decision
between “warm white” bulbs that give off a yellow-ish light, and “cool white”
bulbs that give off a blue-ish light.
Saturating greys in a user interface works in a similar same way.
If you want your greys to feel cool, saturate them with a bit of blue:
To give your greys a warmer feel, saturate them with a bit of yellow or
orange:
159 Greys don’t have to be grey

--- page 160 ---
To maintain a consistent temperature, don’t forget to increase the saturation
for the lighter and darker shades. If you don’t, those shades will look a bit
washed out compared to the greys that are closer to 50% lightness.
How much you want to saturate your greys is completely up to you — add
just a little if you only want to tip the temperature slightly, or crank it up if
you want the interface to lean strongly in one direction or the other.
Greys don’t have to be grey 160

--- page 161 ---
161 Greys don’t have to be grey

--- page 162 ---
Accessible doesn’t have to mean
ugly
To make sure your designs are accessible, the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG) recommend that normal text (under ~18px) has a contrast
ratio of at least 4.5:1, and that larger text has a contrast ratio of at least 3:1.
For typical dark-text-on-a-light-background situations, meeting this
recommendation is pretty easy, but it gets a lot trickier when you start
working with color.

--- page 163 ---
Flipping the contrast
When using white text on a colored background, you’d be surprised how
dark the color often needs to be to meet that 4.5:1 contrast ratio.
This can create hierarchy issues when those elements aren’t supposed to be
the focus of the page — dark colored backgrounds will really grab the user’s
attention.
163 Accessible doesn’t have to mean ugly

--- page 164 ---
You can solve this problem by flipping the contrast. Instead of using light
text on a dark colored background, use dark colored text on a light colored
background:
The color is still there to help support the text, but it’s way less in-your-face
and doesn’t interfere as much with other actions on the page.
Rotating the hue
Even harder than white text on a colored background is colored text on a
colored background. You’ll run into this situation if you’re ever trying to pick
a color for some secondary text inside a dark-colored panel.
If you start by taking the background color and simply adjusting the
lightness and saturation, you’ll find that it’s hard to meet the recommended
contrast ratio without getting very close to pure white.
Accessible doesn’t have to mean ugly 164

--- page 165 ---
You don’t want the primary text and the secondary text to look the same, so
what else can you do?
Well since some colors are brighter than others, one way to increase the
contrast without getting closer to white is to rotate the hue towards a
brighter color, like cyan, magenta, or yellow.
This can make it a lot easier to make the text accessible while still keeping it
colorful.
165 Accessible doesn’t have to mean ugly

--- page 166 ---
Don’t rely on color alone
Color can be a fantastic way to enhance information and make it easier to
understand, but be careful not to rely on it, or users with color blindness will
have a hard time interpreting your UI.
Take these metric cards for example. With this design, someone who is red-
green colorblind can’t easily tell if a metric has gotten better or worse:
An easy fix for this is to also communicate that information in some other
way, like by adding icons to indicate if the change is positive or negative.

--- page 167 ---
What about something like a graph, where each trend line has a different
color?
In situations like this, try relying on contrast instead of using completely
different colors. It’s much easier for someone who’s colorblind to tell the
167 Don’t rely on color alone

--- page 168 ---
difference between light and dark than it is for them to tell the difference
between two distinct colors.
Always use color to support something that your design is already saying;
never use it as the only means of communication.
Don’t rely on color alone 168

--- page 169 ---


--- page 170 ---
