

--- page 199 ---
Working with Images

--- page 200 ---
Use good photos
Bad photos will ruin a design, even if everything else about it looks great.
If your design needs photography and you’re not a talented photographer,
you’ve got two options:
1. Hire a professional photographer.
If you need very specific photos for your project, entrust a professional.
Taking great photos isn’t just about using an expensive camera, it’s
about lighting, composition, color — skills that take years to develop.

--- page 201 ---
2. Use high quality stock photography.
If your needs are more generic, there are tons of great resources out
there where you can purchase great stock photos. There are even sites
like Unsplash that offer beautiful photography for free.
Whatever you do, don’t design using placeholder images and expect to be
able to take some photos with your smartphone and swap them in later. It
never works.
201 Use good photos

--- page 202 ---
Text needs consistent contrast
Ever tried to slap a headline on a big hero image, only to find that no matter
what color you tried for the text, it was still hard to read?
That’s because the problem isn’t the text, it’s the image.
The problem with background images
Photos can be very dynamic, with a lot of really light areas, and a lot of really
dark areas. White text might look great in the dark areas, but it gets lost in
the light areas. Dark text looks great in the light areas, but gets lost in the
dark areas.

--- page 203 ---
To solve this problem, you need to reduce the dynamics in the image to
make the contrast between the text and the background more consistent.
Add an overlay
One way to increase the overall text contrast is to add a semi-transparent
overlay to the background image.
203 Text needs consistent contrast

--- page 204 ---
A black overlay will tone down the light areas and help light text stand out,
while a white overlay will brighten up the dark areas and help dark text stand
out.
Lower the image contrast
One of the compromises you make when using an overlay is that you’re
lightening or darkening the whole image, not just the problem areas.
If you want more control, another solution is to lower the contrast of the
image itself:
Lowering the contrast will change how light or dark the image feels overall,
so make sure to adjust the brightness to compensate.
Text needs consistent contrast 204

--- page 205 ---
Colorize the image
Another way to help text stand out against an image is to colorize the image
with a single color.
Some photo editing software includes this as a first-class feature, but if
yours doesn’t, you can create this effect in three steps:
1. Lower the image contrast, to balance things out a bit.
2. Desaturate the image, to remove any existing color.
3. Add a solid fill, using the “multiply” blend mode.
This can also be a great way to make a background image pair more nicely
with your existing brand colors.
205 Text needs consistent contrast

--- page 206 ---
Add a text shadow
If you want to preserve a bit more of the dynamics in a background image, a
text shadow can be a great way to increase contrast only where you need it
most.
You want it to look more like a subtle glow than an actual shadow, so use a
large blur radius and don’t add any kind of offset.
It’s still a good idea to reduce the overall image contrast, but combining that
with a text shadow means you can reduce it a little less.
Text needs consistent contrast 206

--- page 207 ---
207 Text needs consistent contrast

--- page 208 ---
Everything has an intended size
Everyone knows that scaling bitmap images to larger than their original size
is a bad idea — they immediately feel “fuzzy” and lose their definition.
But that’s not the only way you can go wrong with scaling, even when you
think you’re playing it safe.
Don’t scale up icons
If you’re designing something that could use some large icons (like maybe
the “features” section of a landing page), you might instinctively grab your
favorite SVG icon set and bump up the size until they fit your needs.
They’re vector images after all, so the quality isn’t going to suffer if you
increase the size, right?


--- page 209 ---
While it’s true that vector images won’t degrade in quality when you increase
their size, icons that were drawn at 16–24px are never going to look very
professional when you blow them up to 3x or 4x their intended size. They
lack detail, and always feel disproportionately “chunky”.
If small icons are all you’ve got, try enclosing them inside another shape and
giving the shape a background color:
This lets you keep the actual icon closer to its intended size, while still filling
the larger space.
209 Everything has an intended size

--- page 210 ---
Don’t scale down screenshots
Say you want to include a screenshot of your app on that same features
page.
If you take a full-size screenshot and shrink it by 70% to make it fit, you’ll end
up with an image that’s trying to cram way too much detail into far too little
space.
The 16px font in your app becomes a 4px font in your screenshot, and
visitors will be squinting with their eyeballs two inches from the screen,
struggling to make out what all that text says.
If you want to include a detailed screenshot in your design, take the
screenshot at a smaller screen size (like maybe your tablet layout) and save a
Everything has an intended size 210

--- page 211 ---
lot of space for it so you don’t have to shrink it as much:
Or consider taking just a partial screenshot, so you can display it in less
space without needing to scale it down:
211 Everything has an intended size

--- page 212 ---
If you really need to fit a whole-app screenshot in a tight space, try drawing
a simplified version of the UI with details removed and small text replaced
with simple lines:
It’ll still communicate the big-picture design without tempting visitors to try
and make out all of the details.
Don’t scale down icons, either
Just as icons drawn to be used at 16px look chunky when you scale them up,
icons intended to be used at larger sizes look choppy and fuzzy when you
scale them down.
The most extreme example of this are favicons, those little icons you see
next to the page title in a browser tab.
If you try to shrink a logo drawn at 128px down to favicon size, it all turns to
Everything has an intended size 212

--- page 213 ---
mush as the browser tries its best to render all of that detail in a tiny 16px
square:
A better approach is to redraw a super simplified version of the logo at the
target size, so you control the compromises instead of leaving it up to the
browser:
213 Everything has an intended size

--- page 214 ---
Beware user-uploaded content
When you’re depending on user-uploaded images, you don’t have the luxury
of fine-tuning contrast, carefully adjusting colors, or cropping the perfect
frame.
While you’ll always be at your users’ mercy to some extent, there are a few
things you can do to make sure their content doesn’t completely undermine
your design.
Control the shape and size
Displaying user-uploaded images at their intrinsic aspect ratio can really
throw off a layout, especially if there are a lot of images on the screen at
once.


--- page 215 ---
Instead of letting users wreak havoc on your page structure, center their
images inside fixed containers, cropping out anything that doesn’t fit.
This is really easy to do with CSS these days by making the image a
background image, and setting the background-size property to cover.
215 Beware user-uploaded content

--- page 216 ---
Prevent background bleed
When a user provides an image with a background color that’s similar to the
background in your UI, the image and the background can bleed together,
causing the image to lose its shape.
Instead of trying to solve this with a border, try using a subtle inner box
shadow:
Beware user-uploaded content 216

--- page 217 ---
Borders will often clash with the colors in the image, while most people will
barely even realize the shadow is there.
If you don’t like the slight “inset” look you get from using a box shadow, a
semi-transparent inner border works great, too.
217 Beware user-uploaded content

--- page 218 ---
